ALL ABOUT PHANTASY STAR III NAMES (AND A BIT OF OTHER 
STUFF)

Contents:

1. Those syllables in the character surnames
2. Character and place names
3. Mea culpa

What follows is a series of explanations of questionable 
entertainment and informational value regarding the 
translation choices I made for the names in PS3.  I threw 
this together just to give readers background on how I 
made certain decisions and a heads-up on areas where I 
might have made the wrong call.  I am permanently out of 
the loop so far as what's going on in the PS fandom, so 
what I'm about to write below has probably already been 
discussed to death on forums and the like.  Please forgive
any repeat information.

To keep up with the discussions below, you'll need to know,
as you probably already do, that the "r" sound in the 
Japanese language is used to represent both the Western "l"
and "r" sounds.  

***

1. THOSE SYLLABLES IN THE CHARACTER SURNAMES

Most of the main characters in the Japanese PS3 have a last
name composed of their homeland or presumable clan name 
preceded by an isolated syllable: Lynn No Satera or Lune 
Kay Eshyr, for example.  Particularly since the cast of PS3
is almost entirely nobility, I took the syllable to be an 
Alisa III surname prefix like Earth's own "de" or "de la" 
and moved on.

Recently, though, I happened upon this fanart (yes, this 
will be going someplace relevant):

http://www.pixiv.net/member_illust.php?mode=medium&
illust_id=12494708

that suggests that the syllables are meant to represent 
middle initials.  (Please note that Japanese is a language
of syllables; you can't, save for one exception that 
doesn't apply in this case, have a consonant standing all 
by its lonesome.)  Now, on one hand, it makes sense for a 
bunch of short syllables between the characters' first and
last names to be meant as initials, and the illustration 
did give me a bit of an "oh, boy" feeling when I first saw
it.

On the other hand, there are a lot of reasons why this 
wouldn't make sense in PS3, besides the fact that all those
middle initials make everyone sound like a bunch of Nixon-
era politicians.  For one thing, you pronounce an initial 
by saying the name of the letter, and (with the exception 
of the "kay"/"kei" in "Kay Eshyr"), the middle syllables in
the PS3 names aren't names of letters; if you wanted Lynn 
to have a middle initial of "N.", you'd give the rest of 
her name in raw Japanese as "En Satera", not "No Satera".  
Second is usage; if you address someone by or state your 
own full name, as the characters do on many occasions in 
PS3, you state the unabbreviated form of your middle name,
not its initial (unless you're George W. Bush).  Thirdly, 
note that this middle particle changes when a character 
changes their name upon marriage; Mr. Marina becomes Kein 
Le Cille, not Kein Sa Cille.  

Then again, every single argument above can be negated by 
observing that this is Phantasy Star III, and what do we 
expect, really.  Plus, these are the kind of mistakes that 
I can honestly see someone whose native language is 
Japanese making if they were unfamiliar with the whole 
"middle initial" concept, as many folks in Japan are.  
(Much of the time, if a Western name has a middle initial,
Japanese print sources will opt to leave initial in Western
type, thus circumventing the issue of how to pronounce or 
transliterate the letter, even if the rest of the name has
been rendered in Japanese script.)

I'm going to keep the syllables as previously rendered, as 
parts of the characters' last names, but please understand 
that the middle-initial idea is, while problematic, another
possible explanation.

***

2. CHARACTER AND PLACE NAMES

Riik: It's "Riiku" in pure katakana, for which I couldn't 
figure out any sort of logical or attractive English 
rendition and just left in a more or less raw form.  Asked 
now, I might have chosen to render it as "Rhique" instead, 
but that would mean devising a proper name for Shiin, so 
heck with it.

Kein: His name as given in straight katakana and in Western
letters in the character profiles on the Saturn PS 
compilation (though the latter is kinda iffy to cite for 
evidence; see below).  "Cain" and "Kain," the two more 
popular spellings of the name, are for some reason usually
rendered as "Kain" (pronounced "kyne") in katakana, though 
the sounds don't match up.  "Kane" is rendered as "Kein" 
as well as "Keen," making it a legitimate potential choice,
but I've decided to go with the more straightforward 
option.

Maia: Initially, I translated her raw Japanese name, 
"Maarina," as "Marlena," thinking (along with another 
reason discussed below) that an elongated "a" sound for the
initial syllable would not be necessary or present if her 
name were intended to be "Marina."  As I've learned with 
experience, however, Japanese renderings of Western names 
can be a bit liberal with matching up vowel sounds to 
actual native pronunciations.  Additionally, there's the 
minstrel in Rysel who mentions the sand bar between 
Shusoran and Cille as the key to meeting "the child of the
sea," suggesting that the character is indeed supposed to 
have associations with the ocean (and that the whole 
I-washed-up-on-the-shore thing was not just a one-off 
thing from an artistic-thematic perspective).  The on-disc
first-generation character profiles from the Saturn PS 
compilation also give her name as "Marina" in Western 
letters; then again, it also gives Lyle's very-obvious name
as "Rile," so.  Still, I'm changing it back to "Marina," 
but keep in mind this still may not be correct, because...

Lena & Lein: I stick to the official English names when 
they work as acceptable translations of the original names,
and "Lena" works for "Rina," the raw katakana of the 
Sateran princess's name.  I have two reservations, though.
First, Japanese RPG writers are _awfully_ fond of the name
"Rina" and its variant spellings (I mean as an intended 
Western name, not just as a katakana rendering).  Second, 
PS3 is very fond of combinative wordplay in naming when it
comes to relationships like family members or romantic 
rivals (Ayn chooses between Lann and Lynn for a wife; the 
names of all four of Kein's possible grandsons end in 
"in").  The other reason that I initially I translated 
Maia's name as "Marlena is that I originally thought Kein 
was being offered a cutesy choice between Marlena and Lena.
While I suppose choosing between Marina and Lena is still 
cutesy soundwise, it does beg the question of whether the 
writers really wanted a choice between Marina and Rina 
instead.  The PS compilation gives her the name of "Lina,"
which I guess you can throw on the "Rile" pile.
I'm sticking with "Lena," but keep in mind that "Rina" 
might be the actual intent.  In that case, the name of her
son with Kein would be "Rein," not "Lein," as his name is a
combination of his mom and dad's.  (This leads to a 
possible argument for "Lena" and "Lein," though; on the 
path of L's, Japanese Nial's son with Alair/Luise is a 
combination of his parents' names (Luin = LUise + LeIN).  
That doesn't really work as well on the path of R's; all a
Ruin would take from his mom would be the "u.") seems also
to be a possible combination of his parents' name.    

Ain: "Ayn" is a legitimate translation, and it is indeed 
pronounced like the author's name.  I used "Ayn" when I 
first translated his quest and would have continued using 
it had it not been for a discovery about the Kein Sa Riik 
family naming system: the names of all seven male leads end
in "in," with only the first character in the original 
Japanese changed.  

Laia: Even though the pronunciations are the same, I chose 
to preserve the name as it's spelled in the original 
katakana instead of going with the English "Laya" because 
Japanese tends to render foreign words ending in "aya" as, 
well, ending in "aya" ("baya" and "Maya" both end in a "ya"
katakana in the original Japanese).  I believe, though, 
that I've seen "Laya" in secondary sources like Japanese 
soundtrack liner notes, so my decision here might be wrong.

Shiin, Noin, Fuin, Luin: Yeah, I dunno.
Shiin is another "I give up" case like Riik.  One could 
note that "Sean" could be a possible translation of the 
name if the writers were confused on how to pronounce the 
name and assigned the "ea" vowel combination an "ee" sound.
That doesn't follow the "in" naming convention, though.
(Though you could argue for "Sein" in that case, but my
native-English eyes revolt at that.)
Noin is pretty straightforward.
Fuin is too, despite its utter weirdness.  One could argue 
that it's meant to be "Huin" (or maybe "Hewin")  -  
strictly speaking, Japanese doesn't have a "hu" syllable; 
"fu" takes the place where it would be in the syllabry.  
One might argue, though, that "Huin" would start with a 
"hew" sound instead of a "hoo" sound and thus require a 
"hyu" katakana.  Then _again_, see Marlena/Maarina above.  
The PS3 character book gives his name as "Fin" (or "Finn"),
but that's not how his name is depicted in-game and also 
messes with the heroes' naming scheme.
Luin, see Lena & Lein.  I agree that "Ruin" is a far cooler
name for an RPG protagonist.  Lewin?

The Violet Moon: The Alisa III's two satellites do indeed 
have more prosaic names in the Japanese version, but the 
color given to Dahlia, "murasaki," is in truth closer to 
purple than violet.  But "purple" is an inherently 
inelegant word.  (Yes, I know that's dumb reasoning.)

Foundry: There's actually an extra "ow" vowel sound in
between the "d" and the "r"  -  "Foundaury"?  (The original
Japanese is "Faundauri.")  As with Riik, I choose "Foundry" 
and leave it in God's hands.  (Yes, I know I've been lazy 
in regards to three proper names here, but goddamn if PS3
doesn't have some ugly names that're impossible to render 
into anything halfway decent.)

Satellite: Not a name change per se, but an oddity in the 
text.  It's not exactly a secret that PS3 was a rushed 
title, which led to a lot of corners being cut.  Among them
is rampant reuse of text; very few of townspeople outside 
the starting areas, for instance, have something different 
to say between Shiin and Noin's quests and between Fuin and
Luin's. 
One of the bits of text reused is the party's dialogue 
whenever it arrives by shuttle at the final dungeon in the 
second generation; the lines are simply relabeled (with 
bizarrely, the end of the line attributed to either Lynn or
Dan altered to make it sound more natural coming from 
either a younger woman or an older man).  This presents a 
bit of a storyline problem, though, revolving around the 
final line in this exchange: "Satellite...  So the moons 
in our sky were spaceships too..."  Now, this is fine for
Ain's quest, but Lein isn't searching for capital-S 
Satellite; he's simply blasting off for Lune's place and 
doesn't know anything about the Laian "place of peace."  
Now, in Lein's quest, this line given to Laia, which yields
a couple possible explanations.  First, Laia might just 
think (for some nebulous reason) that the Violet Moon is 
indeed Satellite the place of peace and is labeling it as 
such.  This doesn't really work from a storytelling point 
of view, though; invoking the name of Satellite once 
without any context doesn't work in a game where the player
could be going through Lein's quest first and thus have no 
idea of what Satellite is.
The second is that Laia could be recognizing the moon as a 
small-s satellite.  (Japanese has no articles and no means 
of capitalizing a word, so "a satellite" and "Satellite" 
are both represented with the same Japanese text.)  This 
could work particularly for Laia, who presumably might have
a better everyday working knowledge of the old technology 
given her closer links to the time that it was in wider 
recognition and use.  (For the other humans, it's a little 
shakier; if everyone knew what a satellite was, then why 
did no one in Ain's quest suspect that the legendary place 
of peace Satellite was...well, you know.)  One wonders why 
Laia would expect her present-day comrades to recognize 
the term, but then, Searren uses it just before she does.  
Then again, Searren isn't exactly up on his social graces.
I suppose one can't expect Laia to be completely filled in 
on the current state of technology after a 1,000-year nap.
Anyhow, the upshot: the line in the English script starts 
as "Satellite..." when given to Lann and "A satellite..." 
when said by Laia.  This is a (slight) difference in the 
English script but not necessarily one in the original 
Japanese.

***

3. MEA CULPA

I first translated Kein and Ain's quests back when I had 
considerably less experience with Japanese.  Barring 
stylistic changes, here's a list of the errors I made the 
first time around, which were corrected in the 2012 
reissues:

Kein: 
- I missed that a villager in Riik refers to Kein as 
"dispossessed" from succession to the throne (then, 
presumably for the time being, since he's back in if he 
marries Lena).
- The man in Hyurri wasn't "accosted" by Mieu; he merely 
tracked her to the lake.
- I apparently forgot entirely to change the name of 
Hasatak to its Japanese name, Hazatak. ("Proofreading"; 
what's that?)

Ain:
- Lyle never left the battlefield.  He's calling for aid 
when the messenger comes in the prologue and is going out 
and out again into combat at great personal risk when you 
visit Shusoran.  I missed this twice.  Christ Almighty.
- The cape where Lyle appears is the "Dragon's Tail," not 
the "Dragon's Cape." 
- Endora is named "Lott" in the Japanese version; "the 
artisans' village" is an epithet, not the town name proper.
- The woman who speaks of Quisto is obviously romantically 
interested in him.
- Quisto in Lott has had his heart taken captive by Lann; 
he doesn't want to take Lann captive himself.  Yeah, I 
know.  At least Toyo Ozaki's PS3 character book has more 
than enough crack to compensate.

***

R. Capowski, 12/16/12; comments and reprobations on 
laziness to RACapowski@sceneryrecalled.com.